today
we are going to try to do something very
challenging
so
i'm going to teach y'all a little bit
about the relationship between adhd and
depression and i have to say this is one
of the most
difficult lectures that i've had to
prepare
uh so that i'm going to need y'all to
like cut me some slack first of all so i
don't know if this is going to be too
much or too little
we're going to span a lot of different
stuff so we're going to talk about
genetics we're going to talk about
neuroscience we're going to talk about
developmental psychology we're going to
talk about sort of the manifestation in
the present
of
depression and adhd and like how that
looks so basically what i want to do
today is share with you guys
the narrative of adhd and depression so
what are the genetics what happens in
your brain what changes in your brain
result in
cognitive changes or behavioral changes
within a person
how do those changes within the person
affect their development through life
and then what does that look like in the
present like where do we end up once you
have a genetic change a neuroscientific
change a developmental consequence and
then you're kind of in the present
and then the question is going to be
like sort of the next question is like
now that we understand how we got here
and what our current situation is what
we can do about it so this is
challenging as an educator because like
it's going to involve
so many different disciplines of science
and even like a little not so much on
the spirituality but like psychology and
therapy and things like that
so i don't know if it's going to be too
much information i don't know if y'all
are going to be able to follow along so
the one thing that i need is the ability
to redo this lecture in the future if it
kind of implodes
um one thing that i that i've started to
uh
you know really appreciate is that the
internet is full of like really really
smart and engaged people
and so one thing that we're trying to do
at healthy gamer which we're sort of
committed to is like not dumbing things
down so it's my firm belief that you
know the better you understand the
situation even if it's like hard to
understand the more equipped you're
going to be to actually make a neg
positive impact in your life okay
so uh and then if we have time we'll
we'll touch on a couple of reddit posts
so i'm estimating this lecture to take
somewhere between 30 and 45 minutes just
so you all know um you know where it's
gonna be quite dense and so it's
possible it'll like end up with an hour
especially if we get to questions and
things like that
so let's start by talking about adhd and
depression
so the first thing to understand about
adhd and depress let me do an outline so
we're going to talk about
what we understand about genetics
okay and this is the other thing that i
have to tell you guys at many points
throughout this lecture because this is
science and i'm presenting it as such
y'all may feel like oh my god does this
mean i'm screwed i have adhd i have
depression does that mean like because
of my genetics and the genetics are so
bad that we're screwed no you're not
screwed just because of anything that we
talk about here even though it sounds
like the evidence i'm going to present
is going to be quite compelling the
statistics are going to be quite
shocking and at the same time you're not
screwed so don't worry about it okay
we'll we'll i'll kind of explain why so
we're going to start off by looking at
genetics then what we're going to do
is sort of look at how our genetics
manifest as particular changes in our
brain what are the different circuits in
our brain that deal with adhd and
depression
how and specifically what are the
circuits in our brain that result in an
interaction between these two diseases
okay
once we sort of understand the
neuroscience of the brain of someone
with adhd and depression what we're
going to end up with is understanding a
set of cognitive deficits
right so what is like the practical
consequence sure i'm going to be talking
about things like brain volume and
different circuits in the brain and
stuff like that but practically how does
that translate into particular deficits
once we understand the deficits then
what we're going to do is take a look at
development
so if we take someone who has these
particular manifested deficits
how does their life evolve and what kind
of circumstances and experiences do they
have as a result of those deficits
and once we understand development then
what we can do is look at the present
so now that we understand the
developmental arc what does that result
in today like what are you dealing with
today and what are the consequences of
the development
okay so like in the present what are
your symptoms
what does your life look like
right so this is like what we're when
we're gonna cite research at every step
of the way
so if we do a cross-sectional analysis
if you guys know what that means on
people with adhd and depression what do
we find so cross-sectional for those
that that don't know is like
research that basically is about one
point in time in the present okay
and so if we like take a snapshot of
people with adhd and depression what do
we discover about their lives in their
situations
and then the next thing is that once we
understand like all of these different
things and we understand okay what are
the deficits what's going on in the
brain what's the developmental impact
what are what do you face on like in the
here and now
trying to put together a road map
to address our problems
so like once we understand the
complexity that is like adhd and
depression
can
all of this information essentially give
us some kind of road map forward you all
ready for this
is this good
okay we'll get to we'll get to a lot of
what you guys are talking about okay so
let's start with genetics
what do we know
about the genetics of adhd and
depression
so the first thing is that twin studies
so there's a great paper by in 2019 by
farron and larson
show essentially a 70 concordance
with adhd and
depression so what that sort of suggests
is that there's a very tight link
between there's a genetic root that
manifests is both adhd and depression so
like twin studies are actually quite
compelling here that like there's
something going on in the genes so if
you look at genes that there's a 70
concordance between these these two
things and so we'll get to how this is
related and and you know how you
manifest as both but it does appear that
there's essentially like a very very
tight genetic link
in terms of adhd and depression now for
those of you that are kind of so this is
the first point of hopelessness okay
they're gonna be several points of
hopelessness and i'm gonna try to
address each of them in turn
so if i were to say that there's a high
genetic correlation between adhd and
depression what a lot of people will
conclude is that if i've got the bad
genes if i you know if i got unlucky in
the genetic lottery basically i'm
screwed for life but the truth of the
matter is as a clinician that's
absolutely not the case so this is what
i want y'all to understand about like
the relationship between genetics and
how it manifests in an individual
so i think about genetics as a
vulnerability or a potential and
generally speaking what we understand
from psychiatrists and this is clinical
medicine okay so this isn't like genetic
studies this is like looking at real
human beings
is that genetics
plus environment
equals illness
so essentially what's going on is
genetics is sort of like your
vulnerability
or the probability of something going on
and then when you combine that with
particular experiences
if that formula isn't doesn't go well
you end up with illness okay so for
example some people may be genetically
predisposed to trauma so they have like
a 50
you know risk of
trauma
and then depending on what kind of
experience they have let's say they grow
up you know in in central africa where
there's like a lot of you know genocide
and other bad things
then that'll result in something like
ptsd
and so there may be people with like 25
risk or 75 risk and so depending on like
you know what the other traumatic
experience is let's say this is like
you're in the holocaust
so then you end up with ptsd
and let's say even this person is like
you know
had a mom who never gave them like like
no bedtime stories
and this can result in ptsd
so you guys see like basically genetic
genetics doesn't determine
is not like it's not a destiny
it's a vulnerability
that combined with a particular
experience can result in the
manifestation of an illness okay
so like the other way that i kind of
think about this just to use a quick
analogy is i kind of think about like
the the genetic vulnerability as like a
seed okay so like genetics is like a
seed
and then depending on what kind of soil
you plant the seed in and this is where
the experience is like the soil
depending on what kind of
soil you plant the seed and it can
result in a plant or not a plant right
so if like if my soil is like concrete
and i take this seed and i try to plant
it in concrete it's never gonna grow so
like a concrete soil is sort of like
what i think of as like let's say a monk
right because they're so control of
their mind they're in so such strong
control of their mind that like even
genetic vulnerabilities can be kind of
like overcome
compared to if i take you know even a
seed that's not very robust and not very
healthy and i plant it in super fertile
soil like growing up in an environment
where you have parents that are like
abusive and emotionally neglectful even
the you know the the weakest seed when
grown in the most fertile soil will
manifest in a plant and so then people
are saying well okay like i know what
the next you know point of hopelessness
is oh i have a genetic vulnerability i
have a family history of like whatever
and i grew up in an unhealthy
environment does that mean that i'm
basically screwed and the answer is
still no because remember that through
experiences you can actually change the
soil right so this continues to be
malleable
so even if you have genetic
vulnerabilities to particular things by
changing your environment by changing
your relationships you can still escape
the destiny that negative genetics will
offer you does that make sense chat we
understand that
so going back to adhd so there does seem
to be in depression there does seem to
be a strong genetic concordance between
adhd and depression if you drew the
short end of this
the stick or if you drew the short straw
sorry doesn't mean you're screwed okay a
couple of other things to note about the
genetics and sort of correlation between
between adhd and depression so this is
quite alarming
so adhd
increases your risk of depression by
five-fold
okay so it's like an increased risk it's
crazy
by fivefold so you're five if you take
a group of uh you should take a hundred
kids
and 50 of them have adhd and 50 of them
have no adhd the likelihood of
depression is five times higher in the
adhd crowd compared to the non-adhd
crowd even more alarming is there's a
five times
five hundred percent basically
increase in suicidal ideation for people
who have adhd there's also a
3x risk of completed suicide
this is staggering
okay
so people who have adhd are three
three times the increased risk of of
actually committing suicide
okay so there's like a lot of stuff
going on here which may relate back to
genetics we'll talk about this stuff a
little bit more later right so for
example we know that suicidality usually
completed suicide is not like a long and
planned thing
so if you there have been studies done
where basically people take we examine
people who attempted suicide
and for some reason or another we were
able to save their life and then we
asked them when did you make the
decision to complete to try to kill
yourself and movies and media will
portray suicide as like a long and
thought out kind of thing right we'll
sort of think like i'm going to put my
affairs in order i'm gonna write a bunch
of notes and i'm gonna do all this stuff
and i'm gonna order the favorite thing
for like i'm gonna order
presents for the next five christmases
for my kids because i won't be around to
order them right so people like there's
this idea that we put our affairs in
order but somewhere between 60 and 80 of
people
the decision to try to kill yourself
happens within five minutes of the
attempt so it's a very impulsive
decision and so if we look at adhd adhd
we know increases your impulsivity we'll
get to that in a second and so we can
see how if you have a brain that is more
likely to be vulnerable to impulsive
decisions you will actually increase
your risk of suicide
does that make sense so we'll kind of go
into this more
so this is kind of a quick result of um
you know looking at sort of genetics and
the
what are what are sort of the
epidemiologic factors what are the risk
factors and what can we sort of expect
about the connection between adhd and
depression from a statistical level the
other interesting thing about this is
that
treatment
of adhd
reduces depression symptoms
by 20
so it appears that treating adhd
actually has a therapeutic impact on
depression so once again what we're
seeing here through the twin studies
through this stuff and through this
stuff
is that these are not two separate
diseases
that both some people are afflicted
right this is the main point that i'm
trying to make this is what you need to
understand is that we may classify adhd
and depression as completely separate
illnesses but when i work with people as
a clinician and when we look at sort of
the science and the statistics around it
what it seems is that there's a common
process that manifests as both adhd and
depression so it's not like really two
separate diseases it's like there's some
sort of common root that manifests in it
with these two constructs that are sort
of societally made okay
so now let's look at okay so let's say
that i have you know these genetic
changes
okay so i've got a set of particular
alleles that make me
predisposed to
depression and adhd so let's try to
understand what's going on in the brain
of people who are who have this genetic
vulnerability so we're going to talk
about a couple of different circuits of
the brain okay so this is like my
terrible drawing of a brain so here's a
brain okay
so over here we have
the amygdala
okay
so this is kind of interesting
so the amygdala
is responsible for the experience of
negative emotions
it's also our survival center of the
brain
so this is where we experience things
like fear and and sort of anxiety and
things like that okay
we also have uh like the insula which is
kind of around here
which is also relates to negative
emotions
so a lot of our emotional circuitry is
kind of in this central part of the
brain okay
there are a couple other other
sort of things that i want to talk about
this is
the nucleus accumbens so this is a major
part of reward circuitry
so the nucleus accumbens is a
dopaminergic
area of the brain
uh brain which means that it's like
infla like it sort of governs behavior
and reward it's probably actually a
little bit close more to the right which
i guess i can fix later
and then there are going to be a couple
of other parts of the brain that we're
going to talk about one is the
orbitofrontal cortex or ofc
so this involves the regulation of
emotion
okay so like what i mean by this is i
don't know if you guys have had this
experience but like sometimes we get
emotional and we can logically try to
talk ourselves out of it right we can
sort of like use logic or control
circuits of the brain these are our
emotional impulses
over here
okay
so these over here are emotional
impulses
and this is where our control comes from
if that sort of makes sense okay and
this is where if we look at this if we
look at this thing over here this is
where we sort of get the nucleus
accumbens will govern a lot of our
behavior so we'll kind of get to that in
a second okay
the other thing um
the other part of the brain that we're
going to kind of talk about is the
dorsolateral
pfc
okay and this also has to do the motion
regulation
or emotional control i would say as
opposed to regulation we'll talk a
little bit about how those are different
okay
and then the other thing that's kind of
important is that like there are
connections between these these parts of
the brain and those are important too so
like we're going to talk about the
anterior cingulate cortex
okay so this mediates
talk
between
our
emotions
and
let me uh our
i don't know control functions
okay you guys with the neuroscience so
like basically there's this thing called
the acc which is here
which basically is the circuit that
allows these two guys
to talk to these folks over here
so this is sort of a basic we'll kind of
talk about you know what what the
changes are in a second
so this is what we see in people who
have adhd the first thing is that
the volume we have the volume
of amygdala
and insula
is smaller than controls
okay so what this means is like these
parts of our brain are actually smaller
there's like a decreased volume so they
have small
emotional circuits
okay now this is kind of interesting
because some people may hypothesize they
may say well if our like emotional parts
of our brain are like smaller doesn't
that mean we experience less emotion and
it turns out that the opposite is true
that if you look at
um that how can i say this
that uh volume
of amygdala
is inversely correlated
with depression
so the smaller your amygdala is the more
likely you are to experience depression
for people who have large emotional
circuits just based on raw brain volume
they are actually less likely to
experience depression
okay
now the next thing that's important to
understand is so this is so you guys get
this you all got that
so what that basically means is that
like small amygdala and insula which is
what we see in adhd
results in a greater vulnerability to
the experience of depression the second
thing that's really really interesting
is that the nucleus accumbens of people
with adhd is different and the main
thing that's different about the nucleus
accumbens is that our emotional
circuitry
has a large positive effect
on our nucleus accumbens so what does
that mean so this means that people with
adhd
the influence of their emotions on their
behavior
is
stronger
than the influence of emotions on
behavior in a normal brain
okay so what that means is that people
with adhd
their behaviors
are vulnerable
to motion
okay do y'all does that make sense
so so generally speaking our nucleus
accumbens like gets all kinds of
different like projections right so what
will happen is like there will be an
influence from our emotions there will
be an influence from our frontal lobes
there may be even like influences from
like you know let's say our linguistic
cortex not sorry not linguistic lingual
gustatory that's the word i'm looking
for
so this is our ability to taste for
example like that can have influences on
like reward and behavior right so we get
all kinds of like stuff that goes into
the nucleus accumbens and basically like
our brain has this constant calculation
of like should i do this behavior is
this rewarding or not rewarding and so
like you can have things like taste
right like your cortices are like oh i
shouldn't eat that because i'm trying to
lose weight and then like your amygdala
is like i've had a bad day you know i
just went through a breakup screw it
we're just gonna eat a tub of ice cream
so that's like literally like the
experience of a human being can be
mapped onto the nucleus accumbens in the
way that these different parts of the
brain sort of interact with them
so when we look at the brain of someone
with adhd the amygdala and insula are
going to have stronger impacts on the
nucleus accumbens which may also so if
we kind of look at like what is the you
know what is the result of that what
this means if we take like amygdala
and then plus nucleus accumbens in the
brain of adhd what we get is impulsive
behavior
and emotional behavior
you guys see that like how the more i'm
i'm controlled by actually let me put it
this way the more i'm controlled by my
my emotions
the more impulsive i'm gonna seem
my behaviors will be more impulsive do
you all get that so we can kind of see
that the that the phenotype or the
manifestation of adhd
of impulsivity
jesus
may come from this neuroscientific
interaction so now we're going to get to
this in a second but we can see how the
symptoms of adhd are the experience of
someone with adhd their impulsivity
which is not like a neuroscientific
thing there's no like impulsivity
circuit of the brain i mean there may be
a circuit but impulsivity can't be
mapped to a neuroscientific structure
what we can map to a neuroscientific
structure is the integration of all
these different things to the nucleus
accumbens and based on the way that
those circuits integrate into the
nucleus accumbens we can have impulsive
behavior or we can have non-impulsive
behavior
another example of that is that when we
have a very strong frontal
control of our nucleus accumbens we will
result in less impulsive behavior okay
so now we can see that like you know we
can sort of start to see where
impulsivity and especially emotional
decision making
kind of with people with adhd come from
okay
the next thing that we're going to talk
about is in adhd unfortunately there
appears to be
a weak connection
over here
okay
there's a weak connection over here and
so like this the anterior cingulate
cortex and people with adhd is weak
and so what that means is that the
ability for our cortical brain which is
like emotional control regulation of
emotion and most importantly this
circuit that allows the connection
between our control circuits and our
emotional circuits seems to be weak and
so since it's weak our ability to kind
of regulate our emotions or put the
brakes on emotions seems to be negative
and negatively impacted so these are the
functions that we call top down control
so this is deficient
in people who have adhd
what top down control means is like you
know like you can have impulses within
you so i have like an impulse right
which i don't really control it's just
an impulse and then there's like my
brain over here which is kind of
suppressing it it's like oh man i really
want to eat french fries and then my
brain is like no no we're not going to
eat french fries we're going to eat a
salad so that top down control comes
from the frontal lobes
and this part appears to be deficient in
adhd so this is this can also result in
impulsivity you guys see that so now
so this is kind of like a quick summary
okay so let's let's go over it from the
top
and then we'll we're sort of setting
ourselves up to understand the
neuroscience and how this will manifest
is symptoms of adhd so the first thing
to understand
is that
um let's pick
purple
okay
so the first thing is that the brain
volume of the amygdala and the insulin
people with adhd is small
what this sort of results in is
essentially like
our ability to
how can i say this so we know that that
these regions of the brain being small
correlate
with
worse depression
okay so let's just accept that let's not
try to understand how that works for a
second
the second thing is that we have our
control circuits of the brain which seem
to be less connected
to emotions
so what that means is our ability to put
the brakes on our emotions has gone down
so this is also mediated through the acc
and lastly we have the nucleus accumbens
which essentially determines
what we do
and what we see in the nucleus accumbens
of people with adhd is that it's very
sensitive to emotions
and less sensitive
to
top
down
control
y'all with me
right so the experience of emotions
influences your behavior your ability to
put
the brakes on that is harder and then
this is the key thing about reward
circuitry what that means is that like
in your brain
i know it sounds kind of weird but it's
not conscious but you are
there is greater reinforcement
from emotional decisions i know it
sounds kind of bizarre but like what
that means if we kind of think about
like being like in the the behavioral
reinforcement the dopaminergic circuit
that actually drives your behavior and
creates your motivation
all of your motivational hard wiring in
your brain all of your motivation in
your brain that gets hardwired is going
to be more shaped by like emotional
decisions
so it's kind of really challenging okay
so now what we're going to do
is get to the deficits
so this is what happened
so researchers
looked
did a bunch of studies and essentially
what they did is they looked at okay
what are the factors
in um
adhd so if we take a group of people
with adhd and depression
what are the factors that we can sort of
conclude correlate with these two things
right so what this essentially do is
they take a group of people with adhd
and depression they take a group of
normal people and they explore okay what
is the impact of having adhd and
depression so this is essentially what
they discovered
so the first thing is that there is
emotional
regulation deficits
and i know this may seem common sense at
this point or like duh right didn't we
just explain that but i want you all to
understand these are different kinds of
studies right so this is like these are
brain scans where they're just scanning
people's brain and they don't know
anything about the people's symptoms or
their experiences of life
and these are like looking like asking
people questions about okay are you
depressed why are you depressed and then
they track that down to their individual
experience so this is like individual
experiences
and this is like brain scans
right so these are different kinds of
data so we're trying to weave them
together now hopefully at this point you
guys are saying well doug this is
obvious and that's the whole point of
the lecture is to try to integrate these
different kinds of research so we can
get a better understanding the second
thing is
people with adhd and depression are more
irritable and irritability is its own
biological and neuroscientific
thing okay
we'll talk about what emotional
dysregulation means let me actually see
so so actually let's let's define
emotional regulation right now so it is
the ability
to
[Music]
identify
and modify
get ready to get wrecked chat
um
emotional
states
that
promote
adaptive
and goal
directed
behavior
okay
right so this is kind of damning for a
lot of us
so this is a quick side note so in our
coaching program we've had somewhere
between five and six thousand people
maybe seven thousand now and so we're
doing a massive study on our coaching
program and what we find in our coaching
program is that we see a 20 to 40
percent reduction in depression or
anxiety despite the fact that our
coaching program is not treatment for
depression or anxiety so how is it that
coaching can actually improve symptoms
that we're not trying to improve at all
we're not qualified we're not trained
we're not mental health professionals
so it turns out that our running
hypothesis which we're actually studying
right now is that we believe that
coaching actually improves eq or
emotional quotient
it improves our emotional regulation it
improves our ability to identify and
modify emotional states that promote
adaptive and goal-directed behavior
that's what coaching is about it's about
goal-directed behavior and sort of
taking what you are on the inside and
sort of like
adapting it shaping it so that it it
results in like motivation and goal
directed behavior
so anyway that's what emotional
regulation is
so the other things that they found was
that um
people with adhd and depression have
discordant
relationships
so there's discord
within the relationships
they found peer victimization
it's a fancy way of saying bullying
and then they found
academic hardship
okay so when we look at like people with
adhd and depression what we essentially
find is like people are trying to figure
out okay like what are the common
elements
what is the tie between adhd and
depression and these are the five things
that they found they found that people
with adhd and depression have poor
emotional regulation they're highly
irritable and what we can actually see
is that there are a couple of other
things
and that we find discordant
relationships peer victimization like
bullying and like academic hardship
so let's try to understand this a little
bit better okay
so how can adhd and depression result in
in these things
right so let's try to link our
neuroscience to these things
and then how can these in turn lead to
depression down the road so now there's
a really interesting point of of
research here okay
so this point of research is that adhd
i forget exactly leads to like 50 to 70
percent
depression
but
depression leads to 2.7
of adhd
so what does this mean
this means when you take a young child
with adhd
when they grow up to be an adult
there's like a 50 chance they're gonna
have depression
but if you take a young child with
depression there's a 2.7 percent chance
that they're going to have adhd
okay so what it actually means is that
adhd
appears to be a causal factor for adult
depression
but depression does not appear to be a
causal factor for adhd so this is a
really really important
uh point to understand what this means
is that this
if everything was purely genetic
okay and if everything was just like in
the brain
then these numbers should be the same
but what this suggests is that there's a
cogniti i mean sorry a developmental
component here that growing up with adhd
leads to depression and this is really
important for us because this is a point
of hope
if this was just pure genetics and these
numbers were exactly the same
forget about the fact that they're like
so far apart right like 50 versus three
percent that's a huge difference what
this means is that there's something
here that we can actually intervene on
you guys get
this okay so now let's try to understand
how does adhd early in life result in
depression later in life so remember
that what we've if we kind of look at
adhd we have impulsivity
inattention
okay
um
irritability
dopamine reward sensitive sensitivity
and
yeah poor emotional regulation
the other thing that we sort of know is
that people with adhd their frontal
lobes
mature more slowly
so what that means is like their
maturity is going to be less than people
of their age
so let's kind of just think about this
constellation of symptoms and what
growing up as this person
looks like or feels like okay
so the first thing is like let's talk
about you know so now what i'm gonna
actually do is i didn't do a great job
of this so let me actually
think about doing it this way okay what
we're gonna do
we're gonna take these things
okay i'm gonna move them over here
um
no
screwed gg
okay let's just let's take a look at
these three
now what we're gonna do
is take
these
okay
and we're gonna see we're gonna play a
little game chat
so these are the things that we know
from
you know studies
contribute to the depression that people
with adhd have so now let's play a
simple game chat
let's see if these match up right so
let's say i'm impulsive do you think
that will
impact
how do you think that'll affect my
relationships am i more likely to have a
discordant relationship if i'm impulsive
right absolutely
do you think i will mor if my
irritability do you think that will
negatively impact my relationships
absolutely do you think my inability to
attend the situations
will negatively impact my relationships
absolutely
so now we begin to see that okay if if
depression
and adhd is connected through discordant
relationships
we can see how these three factors
will result in
discordant relationships right so like i
want you guys to put yourselves in the
shoes of like a 13 year old with adhd so
let's say i'm like hanging out with my
friends
and then like they're all talking about
something and then like my attention
wanders i don't participate in the
conversation so then like you know i'm
just kind of sitting there and then i'm
impulsive so i randomly start talking
about like zebras
and if zebras if there was a cheese
named zebra cheese what kind of stripes
would it have would it be two kinds of
cheeses blended together
and then all my friends like look at me
like i'm a weirdo because like i'm not
able to attend to the conversation plus
impulsivity and then what ends up
happening so there are studies that show
that basically people with adhd
get
um don't participate in
conversations
in sort of a healthy way
they don't get invited
to social things
amongst all kinds of other stuff right
so we can see that like
and let's not let's not forget about
irritability like the fact that my brain
is more sensitive to being irritable and
having a low frustration tolerance makes
it hard for me to participate in
relationships
okay
now let's think about
bullying
so let's see
what do you guys think do you think that
impulsivity makes me more likely to be
bullied like absolutely right and why is
that it's because of this
so if my social standing in the school
is low because of these kinds of things
that's going to result in me being
bullied so if you talk to people who
have adhd
what you discover is they got bullied
unless you guys know this chat unless
they were a class clown
so like what people with adhd
essentially learn how to do is like the
only way i can gain social standing is
with my inattentiveness and my
impulsivity if i can make other kids
laugh i'm not going to be like bullied
but otherwise their low social standing
their inability to pay attention makes
them like get made fun of even more
right the fact that they're irritable
means like you can get a rise out of a
an adhd kid and since i don't have adhd
and i've got friends i've got three or
four of my friends and i'm gonna like
surround the the kid with adhd and i'm
gonna bully him he's gonna get pissed
and he's gonna throw a punch but the
odds are stacked in my favor so he's
screwed
right because he's not gonna control
himself and that's why i'm gonna pick on
him
if i'm a bully because i know i can get
a rise out of
him okay
now let's think about academic hardship
so
impulsivity does that lead to academic
hardship yes
inattention does that lead to academic
partnership yes yes yes
okay once again the problem here is that
oftentimes adhd is under diagnosed in
children
it is bizarre because because it is the
disease that is the most under diagnosed
disease and the
the most under diagnosed and the most
over diagnosed disease in my experience
what that means is that a high number of
people without adhd get diagnosed with
adhd because they want adderall and
they're bored at school so they like
have trouble with attention and someone
gives them pills and it is the most
underdiagnosed because a lot of times
people will miss diagnoses of adhd and
because kids are smart so the smarter
you are the more you can set up
compensatory mechanisms and no one ever
realizes you have adhd
and does irritability lead to academic
hardship
probably but i think this is a slightly
less of a thing
okay so now let's think about so you
guys with me so like we can sort of see
it's kind of interesting because we can
see that
the the factors that studies show us
show are correlated and serve as the
link between adhd and depression
can absolutely be attributed to a
developmental process because the child
is here
and then as the child grows without
these being addressed we end up with an
adult
who grew up with these experiences and
so now we can see how adhd in childhood
results in adult depression
you all see that so this perfectly
mirrors what the research tells us
which is that if you're going this way
there's a 50 chance
and if you're going this way if you
start with depression you've got a 2.7
chance
you all get that
okay
so it does appear that there's a causal
link so the cool thing is that if we can
fix these in childhood
not just in childhood
but even in adulthood
what that means is that these things
should get better
so as we become professionally more
successful as we engage in healthier
relationships because these problems are
not just developmental right because if
you're still inattentive and impulsive
like it's going to be harder to engage
in relationships
you may still be a social outcast in
this day and age the cool thing is that
this is not set in stone so if we fix
this even in adulthood our relationships
will improve and and we'll see
downstream effects
so now we get to
the present
so this is sort of our development
right and so now we're up to bullet
point
five
okay
and we're going to talk a little bit
about
what this stuff results in so there are
further studies that sort of look at
things like emotional regulation and the
emotions of people with adhd these are
the cross-sectional studies
so these studies or this conclusion that
i'm drawing is developmental so this is
looking at the lifespan of children as
they become adults now if we take a
group of adults and we just kind of like
look at them in this point in time and
we try to figure out what is your
experience of life in this moment with
adhd and depression this is what we
discover
um that the link between emotion adhd
and depression is primarily due to
loneliness
primarily due to emotional regula
relation deficits
and shame so this is i'm tacking this on
there's not i didn't find a single paper
about that i'm sure it's out there but
this is just what i've seen
so when we're talking about you know
what it's like to sit with someone who
has adhd and depression these are the
three primary experiences which lead to
depression in the present
okay now let's try to understand where
do these come from so loneliness is kind
of a no-brainer right we know that
discordant relationships and bullying
like that's going to lead to loneliness
and by the way if we also look at
correlations between suicidality you
guys remember our 3x risk
of suicide
very very highly correlated with
loneliness if we look at people who
actually attempt suicide and commit
suicide they're very lonely so now we
can even see where the big scale
epidemiologic data comes from because
these are psychiatric studies so this is
looking at the treatment of illness in
actual patients
like humans okay
we can see that loneliness comes from a
combination of like discordant
relationships bullying and academic
hardship because you're not good at
school so you don't feel like you're
doing a good job
similarly
bullying and academic hardship will also
contribute to shame right so like this
is the experience of someone with adhd
so we're going to talk about this for a
second so if i've got adhd
i grow up and what do people tell me oh
oh look you're so smart
you just need to try harder i don't know
why you just can't be more disciplined
like i don't know
why you are failing so miserably because
you are so smart because iq and adhd are
not correlated
right and so when a child gets told that
and like a child understands so the
thing that's even more shameful is not
even how what the child is told because
i've had lots of patients with adhd that
have very supportive parents and they're
trying to be supportive right when they
say oh you have so much potential
they're trying to be supportive
but what the actual experience is the
kid
knows
they look around and they see everyone
else in their class and they can sort of
tell they're like i can do math just as
well as the kids around me like i
understand mathematics i'm a smart kid
they look around at all these other
people who are just able to sit down and
study
and like i know that if i get engaged
and i pay attention i can learn history
i can learn mathematics i should be able
to understand this stuff just as quickly
as everyone else or in fact that's what
they discover is that when they're
presented with new information that's
interesting they actually potentially
even learn faster than their classmates
but despite all of these observations
that they're just as capable as their
classmates they just can't sit down and
read a book and so then they feel like
idiots they're like there's something
fundamentally busted in me and oddly
enough the higher their iq is the more
shame they're likely to feel that's sort
of a clinical observation there's some
evidence of that as well there's this
thing called the insight trial
which sort of showed that the greater
insight you have into a particular
problem in this case it was a
degenerative neurological disease
the greater your suicidality is
so like it's kind of bizarre and this is
what's super sad about working with a
lot of my patients with adhd is the
smarter they are the more aware that
they are that they are of like how
screwed they are if that sort of makes
sense
and if you're like stupid and you kind
of don't realize there's a problem it's
sort of like ignorance is bliss
but bizarrely the most shame is felt
by the the students who are actually the
smartest and the most aware
so when we have loneliness and shame
that's going to kind of result in
depression
and then we're also going to have
emotional regulation deficits right and
this kind of goes back to our
neuroscience our amygdala insula our
anterior cingulate cortex and all that
kind of stuff
so there's some interesting stuff that
we can further explore here so you know
if we're kind of thinking about you know
what our process is
for fixing this
we're gonna tunnel down just a little
bit
further and i'm going to kind of dive
into
emotional regulation
because
we talk a lot on on stream about
loneliness and shame but a lot of people
have questions about okay so like if
there's an emotional regulation deficit
like what does that mean what do i do
about it right if if i'm unable to
identify and modify my internal
emotional states
to
be become adapt uh to adapt and to
direct uh and to engage in goal-directed
behavior like what what do i do about
that that sounds like devastating right
that sounds like my problem in a
nutshell is that i can't modify my
internal emotional state to like do what
i need to do
i know what i need to do i just can't
bring myself to do it that's another way
to put it
so further the researchers went tunnel
down even further and started to look at
emotional regulation and realize that
there are three strategies
that
um people with just in general human
beings but especially the people with
adhd will employ to regulate their
emotions
so the first is avoidance
so what this means is that that we're
going to
alter our exposure
to
internally
challenging
experiences
okay so altering our exposure can be
external
in a sense or internal
i don't like this nomenclature great but
it's the best example i have so an
example of an you know an avoidance
that's external is like i'm afraid that
i'm gonna look stupid at the party so
i'm not gonna go to the party
because i'm afraid i'm gonna look stupid
so what they essentially do is they just
avoid the situation entirely okay
there are also cognitive behavioral
avoidance strategies as well
okay so you may ask like what does that
mean a cognitive behavioral avoidance
strategy
so this is like where they actually
reduce
or downplay
the internal
severity
so this is kind of interesting but it's
sort of like mentally checking out is
what i call it
right so this is like when you you like
mentally like you kind of avoid
something in your mind it's like if i go
to a party and i tell myself
um you know i don't i i don't even like
these people
so it's like it's okay if i'm awkward i
don't care about these people anyway
you mentally sort of avoid in your mind
like you use a cognitive avoidance
strategy to insulate yourself from some
kind of internally challenging
experience it's protective in nature
right because if i if i devalue the
other person in my mind
i don't actually have to feel rejected
at all
do you guys get that so i can avoid
going to the party or in my head i can
mentally check out from the party when
i'm there
now this gets a little bit subtle
because there are other emotional
regulation strategies so the next is
suppression
so suppression's a little bit different
because the emotion is there
but i'm gonna squash it down
so you may say
isn't that avoidance and i'd say no this
is sort of fake it till you make it
and if we kind of look at like what's
the difference between someone who
suppresses emotion and someone who's
avoidant is like the person who
suppresses the emotion is still gonna go
to the party
right they're just gonna take all their
anxiety and they're gonna shove it way
down and they're gonna smile they're
gonna put on a face and they're gonna
pretend to have a good time they're not
mentally checked out they're not like
afk in their head and being like screw
all these guys right what they're
actually doing is like there's like an
internal struggle
but there is also an internal
genuineness
or authenticity which they're fighting
against does this make sense
it's very different actually on the
inside it is very very different
because the the thing the emotion is
there we're not avoiding the emotion
we're just trying to conquer it and
fight it
and then the third strategy is
reappraisal
so this is where like we have cognitive
reframes
right so this is like where we do some
like heavy cognitive work this is like
what things like therapy will hopefully
help you do
where you start to like work on things
and you take that negative emotion and
then like you do like once you sort of
have develop some kind of understanding
of for example if i go to the party and
i'm anxious
i can sort of cognitive reframe and sort
of realize oh like everyone else is just
as anxious about what they're wearing as
i am about what i'm wearing no one is
really paying attention to what i'm
wearing so i might as well just try to
have a good time if some people end up
not liking what i'm wearing maybe
they'll make fun of me but i'm pretty
witty so i can just make fun of them
it's like not that big of a deal that's
an example of a cognitive reframe it's
kind of like processing stuff
right working through it
etc and what we find in people with adhd
is that they so let's say normal human
beings
let's call normal people blue okay
so if we have normal people
they'll do like a third
a third
people with adhd will do like nine
tenths
maybe one tenth
zero tenths maybe it's a bit brutal
okay and then you have people who are
like monks
right so monks like in the there's this
there's a scale so like
after you've got guns gotten someone
who's like you know done a lot of
internal work or as a monk
they'll do like 1 out of 10 avoidance
maybe 4 out of 10 suppression and 5 out
of 10 reappraisal
and at some point you've got you know
the
i don't know like whatever i mean so so
over time like i think
you can kind of move in this direction
as you do like more emotional work
okay and like super high eq will be like
nine tens of reappraisal
if that makes sense
so we can kind of see that all humans
will use all of these strategies but
there's evidence
that people with adhd employ avoidance
the most and that avoidance is probably
the most damaging
right so mentally checking out is a big
problem in our community
what's less of a problem but is still a
problem is like internal struggle or
internal conflict and this is sort of
like mental piece
so these are three different strategies
that we can sort of employ for emotional
regulation
okay
so i know it sounds kind of weird but if
you're someone who's got adhd
what you probably want to do is move
from avoidance to suppression first and
then eventually move towards reappraisal
but it's okay to like feel bad and kind
of force yourself through it and that's
why people will say like fake it till
you make it right it's not mentally
checking out it's like acknowledging
that you feel bad and then forcing
yourself to do something
so
now we move on to the last step
okay so just to kind of cover what we've
covered we started with genetics we
started with epidemiology what are the
statistics around adhd and depression
then we talked a little bit about
different structures of the brain and
how if we look at like i do mri scans or
brain scans of people with like adhd and
depression what do we discover about
their brain and how is it different
once we understand understood the
neuroscientific deficits we went on to
look at you know what does that manifest
as what does that look like in someone's
life so what are the the vulnerabilities
or what are the psychological
disadvantages that they have
then we sort of looked at how being born
or growing up with those disadvantages
affects your development
and how that sort of results in
depression later in life
then we looked at in the present
you know what what does it look like if
you're someone who's had adhd and
depression
what does it look like in the present to
be in your situation and then the last
thing that we're going to look at now is
a road map
okay
so now everyone's wondering
what do i do about this how do i fix
this
and the short answer is like there's a
lot to do and you know you're not going
to get an answer in the next five
minutes of how to transform your life
but this is what i will say so the first
thing that i want you all to appreciate
now i'm going to talk purely from a
clinical perspective
so now i'm going to talk about like as a
human being who is a psychiatrist who
works with people with adhd and
depression here is what i've learned
about what works for them
the first is that
there is a diagnostic
um
on there's a diagnostic lack
of sophistication
so what i mean by that is if we kind of
look at all of these scales of problems
right like we can we can take a look at
all of the things we've discussed so is
your problem one of like
reward circuitry
is your problem one of you know orbital
frontal
control
is your problem one where your amygdala
is too hyperactive
or is your problem more downstream right
is your problem something more like
um you know emotional regulation
sorry
and then furthermore we can like tunnel
down right is it suppression
avoidance
or reappraisal which strategy do you use
is your problem irritability
or is is your problem developmental in
nature is the problem that you have a
bunch of shame is the problem that
you're lonely
right is the problem the way that you
interact with people
so discordant relationships
is your problem that you are still
bullied
either by people at work or things like
that is your problem that you lack
professional
or
academic success
and this is what i mean by there's a
lack of diagnostic sophistication so i
can diagnose someone with adhd and
depression and i can give them treatment
right i can give them medications or do
cbt or whatever
but in my experience of working with
actual human beings if you really want
to conquer this it actually starts with
this degree of diagnostic sophistication
so for you to look at yourself and say
like okay which one of these things
really fits me because each of these is
going to have a different kind of like
solution right so let's kind of go
through those
so like if your problem is
reward circuitry like maybe what you
need to do is a dopamine detox
if your problem is orbital frontal
control maybe what you need to do is
meditate
if your problem is amygdala hyper
reactivity maybe what you need to do is
alter your diet for a certain
neurotransmitter production or
be careful about toxic influences
or do a grounding meditation
because there's meditation specificity
all throughout here as well
okay maybe your problem is emotional
regulation so then this is where like
you can do things like you know cbt or
other kinds of exercises to like move
between these
these different areas right so cbt can
teach you how to which is cognitive
behavioral therapy can teach you how to
do reappraisal
you know increasing awareness
of avoidance
so i know it sounds kind of interesting
but if you just become aware of your
avoidance
that can actually move you into engaging
in suppression so just awareness is
actually sufficient at starting the
process of going from avoidance to
suppression
irritability once again there are
dietary changes here so there's evidence
that for example altering the diet of
people with severe autism
to have high iron diets and address
nutritional deficiencies
um
actually reduces the amount of like
meltdowns that they have i know it's
crazy but people have actually done
studies on severe autism and what
they've realized is that like so because
some of these poor kids like they're
just medicated through the roof to keep
them like docile and it turns out that
there are dietary changes that you can
make that will actually alter your
irritability there's a bunch of stuff
about this in dr k's guide about sort of
theories around how altering your diet
affects neurotransmitter production
right so produces serotonin like gives
you precursors that will be produced
turned into dopamine serotonin etc
things like that
if your problem is shame or loneliness
so for shame like maybe you need to go
to therapy and this kind of therapy may
be different it's more processing
therapy right if you're lonely this is
where like potentially coaching could
come in like sure you could go to the
therapy route and talk about how you're
lonely but maybe by working with a coach
you can actually focus on solutions
to make friends right like how can i
understand like okay where can i go how
do i meet people where how do i go
outside we had that post recently so a
lot of different solutions with
loneliness that may not necessarily be
sitting in your your therapist's office
and like talking about how lonely you
are like i know it's crazy as a
therapist sometimes i do not think that
is the cure to loneliness
and now discordant relationships this
one is huge because once you are aware
right so here's my experience with the
majority of people i work with adhd
when it comes to this
they have no idea what they're doing
like they have no idea that the reason
their relationships are discordant is
because they are inattentive
is because they are impulsive that other
people have difficulty keeping up with
them all they conclude is people don't
like me
it's hard for me to keep friends i don't
get invited to stuff and then that just
turns into shame
right so like then they start to develop
an identity of themselves
that i am unlikable people don't want to
be my friend it's not anything in their
control it's it's just like i am this
way and i'm screwed and so it leads to
shame and the more ashamed you are and
the more you come to realize that people
don't want to be your friend you're not
even going to engage in relationships
and then you don't try to engage in
relationships then you end up being
lonely
so by understanding the nature of your
discordant relationships you can even
prep people so sometimes i'll even like
prep my patients about how to talk to
people and say things like hey by the
way i've got adhd
so like there are all kinds of things
that my patients oftentimes do so for
example they'll be late to social
engagements
they'll be
um you know they'll sometimes even
forget like like they won't keep track
of like the fact that we're supposed to
meet someone for lunch and so obviously
like that person is pissed
and so interestingly enough just raising
awareness of your you know
inattentiveness
raising awareness of your
disorganization
and raising awareness of
your impulsivity
can actually
can actually start to mend your
relationships like you can just form
healthier relationships once you
understand all these things
the bullying you know you can teach
people how to set good boundaries
and the professional academic success
there's a lot of stuff here but you know
there's dealing with the shame to begin
with because that's that's like a burden
on you that prevents you from succeeding
you know you have a sense of identity
as a failure so you can work on that
right maybe therapy maybe coaching
something like that and then you can
also do like actual treatment
interventions like maybe you do need
like adhd meds
maybe you do need cognitive behavioral
therapy for adhd
right and the point here is that the
road map
for your
progress and for you to put together
your life is absolutely there
but it starts by sort of having a
sophistication of diagnosis
what is my actual problem here which of
these boxes do i check so you can kind
of go down this list
right and you can kind of say like okay
oh this feels right this feels not right
actually like i'm not getting bullied
it's not a big deal like oh yeah like my
big problems are professional or
academic success feeling of shame and
then like i'm very very avoided
right it's not so much that i'm
irritable like i don't get pissed easily
i actually do have good friends i've got
a good social support structure so i'm
not lonely or this and so it's it's very
specific in terms of how to navigate it
and once again despite the fact that
like you know the last thing that i kind
of want to share with you all is despite
the fact a lot of this stuff is genetic
and neuroscientific in nature
there's still a lot you can do about it
like this is not you know there's a lot
of stuff on the intervention side that
can be done
and generally speaking my my approach is
a clinician and this is what you know
it's not just as a clinician this is
what we also do in coaching
is to like help people understand where
is your actual problem
and awareness of the problem can in my
opinion not even doing anything about it
just recognizing what the problem is
can account for a 50 improvement in
whatever you're talking about so just to
give you guys like a simple
epidemiological example of this so if
you look at like obesity in central
america
so obesity in central america is really
really bad and it's probably due to
the propagation of like sugary beverages
like and people down there like i think
that's changing now but you know 20 or
30 years ago like people like some in
some parts of central america there was
just a lack of education that like
drinking you know like sugary juices and
sugary sodas like three meals a day is
going to contribute to obesity and once
people just realize oh hey what i'm
putting into my body may affect you know
like my health
once that awareness is there it actually
results in like a positive change in
behavior
and so if you look at things like
socioeconomic status and obesity what
you tend to find is that there are parts
of the you know
parts of the world where they're like
there's a very low understanding of like
the impact of like what you put into
your body and how it affects your health
and you can go to places like whole
foods and stuff like that where there
are all these wellness magazines there's
a lot of food that's unhealthy by the
way
but you can see that even awareness can
account for some amount of change and
even from video games we kind of know
like if you don't know why you're losing
a game you can't even begin to improve
it if you're just aware of particular
mechanics right like being aware of
those mechanics will automatically
change the way that you play the game
and so i think awareness in my opinion
is actually worth 50
of the progress and then once you have a
specific problem or once you figure out
what your specific problem is where your
specific vulnerability is you can start
to make changes in that particular
direction to sort of overcome this issue
a couple of things which i i should sort
of say if it hasn't become clear i think
if this stuff resonates with y'all the
first thing you should do if you haven't
done it already is seek an actual mental
health professional's help
so if you're concerned you may have adhd
if you're concerned you may have
depression go and talk to an actual
doctor or like therapist or something so
i know a lot of times we'll talk about
things like dr k's guide and coaching
and all that kind of stuff i really do
think the single most important
intervention you can do is to actually
go see a mental health professional
beyond that there are other things that
you can do like by all means go watch dr
k's guide there's a lot of stuff in
there about meditation and these
different grounding meditations versus
like the meditations that will teach you
control by all means check out our
youtube video on dopamine detox if you
want to talk about this kind of stuff
and focus on solutions to make friends
and things like that that's something
that coaches may be better trained at um
you know helping you with professional
and academic success that may be
something that coaches are can help you
with
uh you know helping with discordant
relationships that can be therapy or
coaching
but really at the top of the list is if
you guys have not seen a mental health
professional you should absolutely go do
that
questions
or i guess let me just kind of summarize
so just to kind of cap recap
today we talked a little bit about adhd
and depression and the goal of what i
was trying to do today is to stitch
together
a lot of different
disciplines of science to give us a very
clear understanding
of
what adhd and depression like how they
interact and what they are so it starts
with genetics where we sort of
discovered that 70 of
adhd and depression appears to be
has a 70 concordance in genetics that
there are a lot of scary statistics that
show that adhd and depression may start
at the genetic level so once we
understood the genetics we kind of went
into certain neuroscience and tried to
figure out okay what's happening in the
brain of people with adhd and depression
how do these two things kind of interact
then what we did is looked at deficits
right so once we understand what's
happening in the brain what does that
manifest as within an individual what
are the actual deficits that someone
with adhd and depression has
once we understood what the deficits are
we sort of were able to take a
developmental perspective so if you take
a kid who has these kinds of develop
deficits
and sort of has adhd as a child
how does growing up with those deficits
manifest as depression
when you're an adult and we kind of
explored those things and what what
whether the statistics tell us what does
the research tell us are they
contributing or what are the smoking
guns of depression in adulthood for
people who have adhd and we discovered
that it's discordant relationships
bullying academic hardship emotional
dysregulation and irritability
and then we even looked at sort of a
more present focused or clinical focused
perspective where we kind of said okay
so like once you're here and you're in
the here and now you grew up with adhd
now you have depression what does that
look like in the here and now what are
the different strategies that people use
in the present to deal with their
emotions
and then finally once we understood that
what is our roadmap for improvement if
you fall into this bucket what do you
actually end up like what can you do
about it and the answer is you can do a
lot so you're not doomed by your
genetics you're not doomed by your brain
there's a ton of stuff that you can do
and i've worked very successfully with
like tons of patients that have been
able to essentially overcome adhd and
depression so there's hope out there
don't give up and i really hope that
today's lecture has empowered you all to
better understand this really
fascinating aspect of like human
neuroscience human psychology and like
sort of
the experiences of these people in the
present
questions
all right questions
okay i'm gonna focus on questions
relating to adhd and depression for now
uh just
how does strengthening the frontal lobe
affect stuff
okay good question
so let's kind of go back
so how does strengthening the frontal
lobe affect stuff
so remember that our motivation
behavioral drives and essentially what
we do our reward circuitry
is the nucleus accumbens
now in the nucleus accumbens
let's kind of go down here okay
so let's look at point number seven
how does
frontal lobe
affect things
so in our nucleus accumbens
there's like a pro and a con for a
behavior okay
and essentially what happens is like our
emotions may be telling us break up with
this person
and our frontal lobes may be telling us
oh no no don't do that don't give in to
the emotion there's like there's a
tension
between emotions
and frontal lobes
in the nucleus accumbens and depending
on which one wins if the frontal lobe
wins then like you'll engage in one
behavior and if the emotions win you'll
engage in another behavior it even goes
a little bit deeper because the reward
structure can be related to emotions or
frontal lobe and so what that even means
is that
how can i say this
let's say i'm bullying someone the
amount of satisfaction i get from
bullying someone
relates to the emotional impact on our
nucleus accumbens versus our frontal
lobes which is why we'll see like if you
look at people who are lifelong
meditators
they don't engage in like toxic behavior
because it feels less rewarding to them
this is how like people who meditate on
a regular basis like become better human
beings
i know it's kind of bizarre because it's
not just the influence of like you know
what you end up doing it's also the
reward that you get from like giving in
to your emotions so like giving in to
hatred is going to reward it's going to
reinforce your behavior in a particular
way and it's going to feel really really
good if your brain is like framed a
particular way when you strengthen
strengthen your frontal lobes literally
the satisfaction that you get from being
a toxic on the internet goes
down and so then we see a reduction in
that behavior because your reward
circuitry has been altered
does that make sense
um so you mentioned genetics but are you
familiar with the science behind
epigenetics in regards to this
specifically the studies about things
like ptsd being passed down to children
through epigenetics yeah i'm pretty
familiar with that research so let's
take the question from the top so
there's some evidence okay let's just
really go from the top
so the first thing is that
there's a field called epigenetics which
is not the actual genes
but the act how genes are turned on or
turned off so our genome look we've got
a bunch of stuff in there and it's not
necessarily the allele or like the the
gene like the dna sequence at a
particular point but like you can turn
genes on and you can turn genes off
that's called epigenetics
so
whether genes are turned on or off
actually relates to our experiences so
certain kinds of genes
will be turned on by certain kinds of
experiences so an example of this
is when our body gets an infection we
will activate transcription we will turn
on genes of things like heat shock
proteins and other kinds of like genes
in our cells that will help us fight
infection right so it's like there's a
bunch of stuff that like once we get
infected our bodies like time to go to
war let's start producing like let's
turn on our armories and start producing
soldiers and like you know cytokines
that will help us fight infection so
experiences can affect our genetic
uh
activation
and so if we go back to what i was
saying earlier about what is the model
of genes right so that's where i sort of
shared that genetics plus vulnerability
is what results in illness and all that
kind of stuff is epigenetic
so this is also where when we kind of
look at that that developmental aspect
when we were talking about okay if you
have a kid with adhd who grows up with
an adhd brain
and experiences life as a kid with adhd
with bullying and not having friends and
like poor academic success that's going
to have an epigenetic impact and make
you vulnerable to depression so i
believe a lot of that stuff is mediated
through epigenetics i personally have
not looked into the epigenetics
of development with adhd as it relates
to depression but i sort of feel like i
don't need to because there's like i
mean hopefully i made a convincing
argument of this i think we have enough
pieces of the puzzle where we're like
pretty sure that that's happening
great question though
um
yeah so can can you explain more how to
work on discordant relationships sure
so the term discordant relationship
means like a relationship that has
discord right it's something that's not
working properly
so if you want to work on discordant
relationships as someone with adhd
i think the main thing to understand is
what are your adhd deficits that could
impact the relationship that's the first
thing you've got to do
so is this relationship not going well
because i am disorganized and i like
don't show up when i'm supposed to show
up is this relationship not going well
because i was supposed to pick up pick
someone up at the airport and i showed
up an hour late because i'm disorganized
like that's a very practical example of
how disorganization and adhd negatively
affects the relationship
is this relationship being negatively
affected because i'm inattentive so when
i do hang out with someone i'm literally
not able to attend to like what they're
saying so we're going to dinner together
and like i'm going to dinner with let's
say my partner right so my romantic
partner and they've had a bad day and my
mind is like wandering all over the
place so then that that partner will
feel unheard they'll feel like someone's
not listening to them they won't feel
emotionally supported and it'll create
discord in the relationship
so the first thing to under to do or
maybe it's like irritability or
emotional regulation right so maybe the
way the reason that my
relationship is in discord is because
i'm too irritable i've had a bad day and
then i like go and meet my friends and
since i'm in a foul mood because i'm
overly irritable like i snap at them and
they feel hurt and then like i feel like
kind of i feel like i screwed up right
and then the avoidance kicks in because
we know that people with adhd engage in
avoidance behaviors and so once i create
a problem in a relationship
since i rely on avoidance i never really
fix it right i never talk to them about
it i never apologize to them or i overly
apologize and never engage in discussion
i never asked them hey what was it like
to have me being like irritable that day
right i never want to hear from them
how i'm like actually sometimes not a
great friend so i avoid
so like that's an example of like
looking at
not only the the predispositions you
have
to damage relationships but then also
your coping mechanisms can sort of
reinforce that damage or interfere with
your repair mechanisms because you're so
avoidant and that leads to discordant
relationships
so how do you work on it right so now
this is where we kind of look at for
example like if you know that what your
problems are you can actually have
conversations with people about them
right you can say hey by the way so like
let's say you go to dinner with your
partner and and they're like they're
talking about things and you can even
like while you're tuned in you can say
hey
i can see that this is something that's
really upsetting you and i'm having a
lot of trouble focusing on what you're
saying and what i really want to do more
than anything else is focus on what
you're saying
um so i'm going to do my best but i
apologize if it seems like i'm kind of
checked out
i'm really trying to pay attention
the second thing that you can do is even
suggest an alternative and you can say
hey like it's really hard for me to like
pay attention to you like being in this
crowded restaurant
is it okay if we table this conversation
let's go for a walk after we're done
with dinner and like i'd love to hear
about it maybe we can go for a walk
because oftentimes what people with adhd
discover is that having some kind of
physical activity helps them pay
attention
so i've even had i've written notes for
students of mine for them to be able to
knit during class
okay so this is a really interesting
thing that if if people with adhd are
able to knit they can actually pay
better attention mentally so you i'll
even have patients who will be like hey
let's like i'm going to stop eating this
is the extreme i don't think this has
ever happened i'm going to stop eating
and because this conversation is so
important to me i'm going to pull out my
knitting because that helps me pay
attention it's bizarre
right so then you can start to address
things you can also signal to other
people because remember that if they
don't know what's going on internally
they're going to interpret your
inattentiveness as a lack of caring
so you can have a conversation with them
where you can help people understand hey
it's not that i don't care it's that i
really do care and my brain is really
not complying right now
right
so you can sort of address things and
then the third thing which i think is
really really important to improve
discordant relationships is to move away
from avoidance
if there is some kind of conflict if
there is some kind of problem and you
feel really ashamed or whatever like you
can't
bury it right or i guess you can
suppress that's that's what i mean by
bear i mean so that kind of
suppression is actually healthy so
burying it and attending to them but
avoiding the situation never having a
conversation with them never
acknowledging things pretending that
everything is okay or devaluing things
in my mind oh my partner will be fine
it's like not that big of a deal like
they understand i've got adhd i don't
need to talk to him about it all of
those kinds of avoidance strategies will
cause discord in your relationship so
move from those strategies to more
suppression where you're like even
though it's really going to hurt me to
have this conversation because my
partner may say may confirm my my
deepest fears that i'm actually not a
good partner at times i still have to
have the conversation i'm gonna squash
that feeling down and sit down and
actually have the conversation and
ideally you can even get to the point of
reappraisal
where you can work through things on
your own and you can say like you know i
really care about this relationship and
even though it may be hurtful
to get confirmation that i didn't do a
great job in the long term
moving past that is the right move and
really what this relationship needs so i
have to do it because caring about the
relationship and my value for the
relationship is greater than my feelings
being hurt temporarily
that's sort of the ultimate fix
so i hope that helps
um
okay so one person is saying i've tried
to get diagnosed for adhd and have been
told because i'm depressed and my age it
would be inconclusive and am unable to
get treatment for what i what what what
can i do so i'd say go see a different
clinician so let's understand a couple
of things
so adhd oftentimes people will get
tested for adhd so there are
neuropsychological tests so you go to a
psychologist and they will administer
like a test of your attention
based on the results of that test they
can diagnose you with adhd or not
diagnose you with adhd but the truth is
that a test cannot diagnose you with
adhd
all a test can do is give you a
probability of what your diagnosis of
adhd is if that sort of makes sense
because that's how psychological tests
are designed
a true diagnosis of adhd comes from is
often done clinically and a test is used
to supplement a clinical diagnosis and
so what does that mean a clinical
diagnosis that means that you sit down
with a trained professional who
evaluates you and essentially
subjectively decides i know it's kind of
objective but it's really one person's
opinion because that's how we do
psychiatric diagnoses there are no
objective tests for psychiatric
diagnoses
so a trained clinician has to sit down
evaluate your symptoms and say yes
according to my expertise you have adhd
or according to my expertise you do not
have adhd
so there may be so that's ultimately
where the diagnosis of adhd comes from
it doesn't technically come from a test
you know even the test report
will not give you a hundred percent
likelihood that you have adhd if you
actually read the report it'll probably
say and i could be wrong there may be a
test out there that because i'm not a
neuropsychologist
um
so you know i could be mistaken there
but based on as a psychiatrist when i
refer people to neuropsychological
testing they'll give me a report back
and that report will say like you know
we believe that this person has you know
has a high likelihood or extremely high
likelihood of having adhd here are the
neuroscientific deficits that
we believe that this person has which
which is why we think they have adhd so
they go into a lot of detail but they're
never going to give you 100
so just talk to a clinician now the main
confounding factor is that if you have
active depression
so if your cognition is being affected
by your depression
then it it makes it very hard to
determine whether your inattention is a
is coming from the depression or coming
from the adhd if that sort of makes
sense
because we know that people who are
actively depressed have trouble paying
attention to things but that has nothing
to do with adhd that's because attention
is you know a complicated
circuit in the brain that can be
affected by mood that can be affected by
depression so the real way you should
make a diagnosis of adhd with someone
who's got a diagnosis of depression is
ideally to treat the depression have the
depression in remission right so then
they're not actively depressed anymore
and then evaluate their attentive when
their depression is theoretically out of
the picture and if they still have
attentional problems then there's a good
likelihood that they've got adhd now as
a clinician
i've diagnosed people with adhd despite
the fact that they're actively depressed
and that simply comes from
asking questions about what their
attention was like before they were
depressed right so you can still do that
you can still try to do an assessment of
like before depression ever manifested
what was school like for you did you
ever need special testing did you have
difficulty with this do you have
difficulty with that sometimes i'll talk
to their parents and you can still sort
of like make a preliminary diagnosis of
adhd even in the case of active
depression
and that's very important clinically so
i'd say find a good clinician because a
good clinician should be able to suss
that out for you and walk you through
you know maybe treating your depression
so that you can get a good diagnosis but
i'm not surprised that one person would
say hey we can't give you
neuropsychological testing while you're
actively depressed because that'll
interfere with the test results that
sort of makes sense
okay just so you all know i know i'm
getting a lot of like questions and
responses and stuff like i'm still like
on the first round of questions okay so
like i think i can scroll down quite a
bit
um
someone's saying
dr k listening to your voice empowers me
good i'm happy to hear that
i'd also hope that listening to my words
empowers you
oh boy
adventurer 467 says i'm late oh dude
my poor friend
if you came in late to this lecture
it's gonna be tough dude
go back and watch from the beginning
um
okay why do people have adhd what a good
question
this is actually really interesting why
do people have adhd
so it is my belief that adh the reason
we so okay why do people have adhd if we
want to understand why human beings have
things
i think the best
way uh sorry the best answer for the
question why
is
evolution
so i just
as a psychiatrist medical professional
scientist call me whatever you want to
i think if you really want to understand
why like you could turn to things like
religion or yoga or whatever right and
i've studied all that stuff i believe in
some of that stuff but in terms of what
i'm confident you know sharing with
y'all it's basically evolution
so if you look at like human beings
everything we have things that you know
don't exist probably had selection
pressures against them and things that
do exist have selection pressures for
them so for example people may ask the
question why do we get depressed and
there's a good video about this in dr
k's guide
depression
is the evil is the price we pay for the
evolutionary advantage of self-awareness
so if we think about human beings at
some point we became self-aware and it
turns out that from an evolutionary
standpoint the capacity for
self-reflection
gave us such a dominating advantage over
every other species in the planet the
problem is that when we gain
self-awareness we open ourselves up to
depression and that has to do with this
circuit called the default mode network
there's a you know a big thing about
that in in dr k's guide i go into all
that detail
so let's talk about adhd like why would
we have adhd if it's a disease right
whereas i think you have to and there's
a good theory about this which is sort
of the hunter versus farmer uh theory
which is that when human beings were
like you know ten thousand years ago or
five thousand years ago human beings had
different temperaments
so some human beings were very like
routine oriented like to wake up at the
same time every day like to go to the
same place every day and do the same
stuff every day so these people became
the farmers and there were other human
beings that hated being a farmer they
wanted variety and they wanted to like
go out and explore and they needed to
attend to a lot of stimuli so when i'm
walking through the jungle my brain
needs to be like bouncing all over the
place it needs to kind of be adhd it
can't just focus on one tree it has to
look at this tree and has to look at the
ground is there a snake over there is
there oh is that like a footprint over
there is that is that a broken branch
over there and so what there's almost
like this adaptive benefit to having a
mind that's attention is more loose and
not focused and not repetitive
and so early on in in human like in
societies like we had hunter gatherer
societies we had early farming societies
and things like that and there was
probably a selection pressure for both
so the most successful tribe was one
that had some farmers some people who
were in the routine and some people who
were like very dynamic and had attention
all over the place
so essentially what happened is like
that's why we see in society we have
both camps right we have the people
whose attention is all over the place
these are the vatas for lack of a better
term and then we also have the kaphas
these are the farmers the people who are
very routine oriented the reason that
adhd is now a disorder
is because of a couple of things but the
first and biggest reason is because our
society has a very very farmer bent
so like hunters like don't do well in
our society anymore if we think about
school for example school is like eight
hours a day the same crap all day every
day it's not being out in the woods it's
not learning with your hands it's not
using your hands right it's not being a
tradesman anymore or trades woman it's
it's all about like schools and books
and learning and nine to five and the
grind and stuff like that so that
benefits the farmers it's a farmer-like
society
as a result
now this thing which used to be an
evolutionary advantage when we were
hunter-gatherers has now become a
disorder because we don't we're not able
to function in this society with brains
like this
so that's my big answer to why is there
adhd it's because these brains no longer
fit with the society that we have there
are also other influences like we know
that for example early exposure to
technology and especially like short
form technology
reduces our attention span and makes
like it hard for us to like
retain attention on one area so it's not
just societal influence there can also
be like technological influences where
there are even studies that have been
done on long-form television versus
short form television so if you take a
kid and you give them long-form tv like
you have them watch a movie that's not
going to negatively affect their
attention span whereas if you have a kid
who's watching 30 second clips on
youtube for like six hours a day their
attention span is going to be like
really really short right so they'll
still be very dynamic they can juggle a
lot of things but their ability to sit
through school is not going to be like
it's going to be hard it's hard for them
to sit down and focus their attention
so there do appear to be societal
influences that are like more
developmental and related to technology
too which is why adhd i think is getting
worse actually so that's why we have
adhd
okay
oh man what are the comorbidities of
other conditions that also match adhd
symptoms dude that's a whole lecture in
and of itself
um
but the short answer is that's why we
have the process of differential
diagnosis
so remember that you know
adhd is a collection of symptoms like
impulsivity for example inattention
irritability if we look at the
differential diagnosis for those
symptoms there's like a ton of stuff
right so ptsd is the great chameleon of
mental illnesses and can masquerade as
pretty much anything bipolar disorder
depression can sometimes there's a
subtype of depression called depression
with anger attacks which is like a bit
that depression which we also talk about
in dr k's guide so that's where like
people who are depressed aren't sad they
just get super irritable so even
depression can manifest as like
irritability and inattention
bipolar disorder for sure if you're
manic rights or hypomanic you're more
irritable you're less attentive you have
flight of ideas so bipolar disorder can
manifest as substance use is very high
on the list of like on the differential
right because if i'm like high on
adderall or i've had too much coffee i'm
going to be speaking very fast my mind
is all over the place and i'm going to
be irritable
so the differential diagnosis is huge if
you want to you know a great i mean i
guess we could theoretically do whole
lectures about differential diagnosis
but that's when we're really like
talking medical school kind of stuff
like that's what i teach clinically like
when i've
you know a resident who's like a
psychiatrist or a medical student who
wants to learn about psychiatry like
that's the kind of detail that we go
into there good question though
um
seems like defective executive function
would be a disadvantage in tribes i
would think so
so i i think like executive function is
like the most op thing in the brain in
my opinion so i don't know why we would
have a deficit for executive function if
we look at it evolutionarily probably
the reason that we have deficits in
executive function
is because of opportunity cost
so if you kind of think about it i know
this sounds kind of weird
but what do you think is like
evolutionary evolutionarily advantageous
being very like stable and monogamous
monogamous and staying in one
relationship for your entire life that
is like harmonious where you raise two
kids and you you know you make sure that
you can like support them with resources
or being somewhat of an emotional train
wreck and having like lots of different
children with like lots of different
people
what's actually like evolutionary
advantageous
right like falling in love and then
having a train wreck of a relationship
if that happens like six times over the
course of 15 years
it's interesting right so like
evolutionary advantages are about
survival and reproduction by the way i'm
not sure that that's the case so i
literally do not know
because it may be that you know that
person's
offspring or like less likely to have
successful offspring of their own like
you never know
so so it's interesting but
yeah we don't really know why people
seem to have executive function deficits
but it may be because like if your
executive function is too high like
you're less likely to have children
who knows
okay
uh
um
so would you have any recommendation
for adhd dears
with depression who are currently unable
to access medication due to waiting
lists any supplementation or specific
meditation techniques you'd recommend
so i'd go back to the roadmap right so i
gave you all like lots of different
things to work on
as far as supplementation goes i'm not
going to recommend any supplements
generally speaking we try to steer clear
of that here at hg i mean we do do it in
dr k's guide because
i think there's a lot of backstory
before like you understand like you
think about taking a supplement so in dr
k's guide we go into a lot of detail
about the dangers of herbal supplements
we also want to do a very thorough like
review of the literature and the science
before we recommend anything so there
are particular things that we'll talk
about for depression and anxiety but it
needs to have like you know a lot of
safety discussions
a lot of like exploration of the real
efficacy of supplementation
so while there are things that i do for
my patients and that's basically about
that balancing diet is what i would
recommend
there's a lot of back story to that and
a lot of complicated stuff that you need
to do before i just say hey do this so i
think one of the unfortunately
irresponsible things that tends to
happen is people will talk a lot about
supplements but they won't have in my
opinion the
boring
safe conversations that you really need
to before you get into supplementation
as far as specific meditation techniques
i think i addressed that in the roadmap
as well so we we've taught some
techniques for restraining attention
like the rotating sound awareness
meditation um
and by the way the the guide now has a
meditation index where you can now
search based on like if you're looking
for grounding techniques and things like
that it'll like point them out to you
but i think that depending on going back
to the roadmap
once you figure out what your problem is
there are specific meditations for like
each of those problems so if your
problem is shame for example you may
want to do like some kind of anahat
chakra or mehta meditation these are
heart chakra meditations that are all
about cultivating compassion and
forgiveness that's going to be different
from
the meditation that helps you restrain
your attention and focus on one point
that in turn is going to be different
from the kind of meditation that you use
to ground yourself when you're
emotionally activated and like very
irritable
right so there are all these different
meditation techniques there really isn't
great science yet that
specific meditation techniques
target things at the resolution that i
teach
because you just have to do a ton of
clinical trials we're i think we'll get
there we're getting there
but clinically i found it to be very
effective to teach people specific
targeted meditation techniques but those
techniques depend on you know the
roadmap
um so so one person is saying great so
adhd is good for nothing now i disagree
so i'm pretty sure that if you look at
successful streamers and content
creators
the prevalence of adhd within content
creators is higher than the average
population
i think as our society is becoming more
adhd with shorter form content and
things like that
right so like it's like the adhd brain
who did we have um
that guy uh who has so he so first of
all if you go back through our
interviews like we have a bunch of like
streamers and content creators who have
like we'll say yeah i have adhd
um daily dose of the internet so i think
i think that's a guy i think if i
remember correctly he sort of said like
i have really
bad adhd and if you kind of think about
it what is he doing like he
instinctively knows because of his adhd
what he finds entertaining so he uses
his adhd is almost like a compass
to determine like what's getting
included in daily dose of the internet
and what isn't and it's very successful
right so we've also got people are
mentioning miss kiff and and xqc and
stuff like that so like yeah i mean
check out the mischief interview if you
all are curious that's an excellent
interview about adhd
but i do think that it's you know adhd
has advantages like
once it crosses the threshold of
disorder it's
the reason we define it as a disorder is
like because it's negatively impacts
your function so if you've got super bad
you know adhd chances are it's just like
it's a it's a negative right
um but that's why i also prefer to sort
of use the ayurvedic system because i am
quite adhd but i'm like subclinical so i
think avata is a better example of like
how to understand the spectrum the bell
curve of like attention across human
beings
is becoming apathetic to your successes
whilst obsessing over your failures
common with adhd i'm gonna say yes
so let's go back to the neuroscience
so remember that
oh man this is so complicated let me
just think about this
okay
so the question is is becoming apathetic
to your successes whilst obsessing over
your failures common with adhd and i'm
gonna say yes
so let's
let's lean a little bit on what we've
learned today okay and maybe y'all can
walk
walk through this with me
so first thing is obsessing over your
failures common with adhd let's unpack
that phrase so the first thing is
obsessing so one of the hallmarks of
adhd
is
dysregulated attention so a lot of times
people assume that adhd means a very
small attention span but the truth is if
you talk to people with adhd what you
find is dysregulated attention and what
that means is that
sometimes their attention is very very
small but the flip is also true where
sometimes they get so deeply absorbed in
something
where like
like everything around them ceases to
exist so this is a disorder of attention
instead of your attention staying kind
of in the middle where you can get
distracted when you need to get
distracted but you can focus when you
need to focus what you'll see oftentimes
in adhd is a hyper focus
to the impairment of their life
so i get so caught up in a video game
that i lose all track of time i get so
obsessive about something that i stop
paying attention to everything around me
so there is obsession is actually like a
very interesting hallmark of adhd and
something that leads to the a
misdiagnosis
because what you'll find is sometimes
people will be like you know parents
will think about their kids and they're
like well my kid sometimes has paying
attention but then once he starts
playing legos it's clear that legos can
hold his attention for three hours at a
stretch without any interruption so that
must not be adhd because he's sitting
there he's playing with the legos at
three hours of stretch that can actually
be a feature of adhd so it's disordered
attention okay
the second thing is so that's the
obsession so the second thing is
obsessing over failures so remember we
talked a little bit about how the volume
of the amygdala and the insula and
people with adhd is smaller
the interesting thing is that volume
loss correlates with worsening symptoms
of depression so it appears that the
brains of people with adhd are actually
more vulnerable to negative emotions
right which is why they're prone to
depression
so obsessing over your failures is
completely consistent with with our
understanding of adhd
now being apathetic to your successes
has two elements one that i've sort of
already talked a little bit about and
the second one that's kind of new
so the first is being apathetic to your
successes is likely an avoidance
strategy to help emotionally regulate
yourself so remember that people with
adhd have difficulties with emotional
regulation and so their inability to
regulate their emotional emotions
results in three coping strategies
avoidance suppression or reappraisal
avoidance is when we kind of mentally
check out from the thing we either avoid
the situation entirely we literally
don't go so we can physically check out
of the situation or what we'll do is
mentally check out of the situation so
we'll even go to the place but we'll
devalue something in in my mind so that
it doesn't i don't have to be hurt by it
right so i kind of go afk in a situation
that's absolutely a tactic
used to overcome my disordered emotions
to begin with it's a coping mechanism so
healthier than that is suppression where
at least i feel the emotion but i push
it down so there's internal conflict
versus mentally checking out and then
the third and healthiest thing is
reappraisal which is when i kind of work
through the emotion and i end up like
looking at the silver lining or
realizing that okay even though i got
you know even though my partner dumped
me like in the grand scheme of things
like there are other people out there i
learned a lot from the relationship i'm
gonna know better what mistakes not to
make next time that's an example of
reappraisal so we can see how apathy to
success absolutely falls into that
avoidance category
as a coping strategy against your
difficult emotional regulation which we
once again know that people with adhd
have
so that's consistent apathetic with
success the last thing that i'll mention
which is a little bit different which is
a little bit more from the yogic
perspective or the eastern perspective
is when you're a child with adhd
and it's hard for you to succeed because
you have certain
neuro
neurological disadvantages in terms of
like attention and things like that
one of the things that you have to learn
how to do
is
divorce yourself from success
and this is a protective mechanism so i
want you to put yourself in the shoes of
like a 12 year old who has difficulty
studying
and so if i have difficulty studying and
i'm afraid i'm going to do bad on the
test
what i have to learn how to do is numb
myself right because if i've been if i'm
invested in success and i have adhd and
then i go and fail the test i get
punished right because i wanted to
succeed i wanted to succeed i wanted to
succeed and so i i try really hard and
then i end up failing anyway because i
have adhd it's not my fault i spent
eight hours in front of a book but my
brain wouldn't focus and so that hurts
so much so what do i learn how to do i
become psychologically calloused
i learn how to numb myself i learn how
to be apathetic to my success because
the cool thing is that if i become
apathetic to my success
i also in a sense become apathetic to my
failure right because if i divorce
myself it's like ah i don't care about
the test whatever whether i succeed or
fail whatever
and so it sort of becomes a short-term
coping strategy which doesn't really
work because as you kind of mentioned
you do still obsess over your failures
right but that's because your brain is
vulnerable to the negative emotion so
despite the fact that you're numbing
yourself to the success and the failure
if you've got a brain that's more
vulnerable to the negative emotion what
you kind of end up with is i'm numbing
both equally but i'm hypersensitive due
to my small volume of insulin amygdala
to the failure so even though i'm
numbing both equally
i have an amplification of the negative
emotion due to the way that my my limbic
system is wired right and so that's sort
of like it's it's like actually a
perfect example of everything that we
understand from neuroscience everything
that we understand from development why
people with adhd are apathetic to their
successes
and obsess over their failures
and hopefully if you watch that whole
lecture you'll be able to follow that
you'll be able to arrive at that
conclusion as well
there are so people are asking about
gender differences between male and
female adhd
so the biggest difference is that men
seem to be more vulnerable to adhd than
women i don't have the exact statistics
but i think some of that also has to do
with maturation of the frontal lobe so
uh girls tend to have slightly more
mature frontal lobes than boys do so at
the end when everyone's fully grown it
all evens out but generally speaking
like sometimes girls will have you know
we'll have like be like developmentally
one to two years
or boys will be like one to two years
behind or girls will be like one to two
years ahead so that's pretty common a
lot of that has to do with frontal lobes
and adhd does appear to be more common
in men than women
um
would you argue oh man it's so hard
because everything i say you guys that's
so i'm like responding to questions from
like 10 minutes ago or comments which is
hard i have to figure out how to handle
that
would you argue that adults teenagers
these days have a harder time to cope
with adhd due to technology
because the human brain wasn't prepared
for the advancement compared to older
generations absolutely
so
you know if we look at older generations
oftentimes like
i don't mean to speak poorly of them but
like the boomer generation right which
it's not all boomers but some of them
tend to be very
not sympathetic
towards the mental health plights of
like the digital generation right so the
pre-digital generation is like i don't
understand why y'all are all so messed
up back in my day i had to walk 10 miles
through the snow
to get
to get a
glass of milk or whatever right they'll
like they'll look at their world and
then compare their world to our world
and when they look at the when they
compare their world to our world what
they'll do is they'll look at a lot of
the advantages that we have now which
they didn't have back then which are
fair right so for example like
food security i'm pretty sure is better
now than it was a hundred years ago you
know infant mortality is better now than
it was a hundred years ago um you know
the likelihood of like dying from
cholera is like way better now than it
was a hundred years ago
um you know
we have society has advanced society has
become more convenient you used to have
to go to a restaurant if you wanted to
eat food at a restaurant like from a
restaurant right now we have a bunch of
people that deliver you can get
groceries delivered you can get food
delivered you can get all kinds of stuff
delivered you can go to school online
our life has a bunch of convenience
right so there used to be a certain kind
of hardship
100 years ago that we don't experience
there are objective you know
life has gotten by a lot of objective
measures like mortality and life
expectancy and things like that better
than it was a hundred years ago
so you know the pre-digital generation
looks at us and they say things are so
much better and they point to all these
things and they say like why are you so
mentally unhealthy like why do you have
adhd why can't you just study why are
you depressed why do you have anxiety
i think things that i think the things
that they don't look at they take some
things for granted because they really
don't have any awareness of like what
it's like to grow up in these conditions
right so they see the change they see
some changes which are very external
but what the pre-digital generation
doesn't understand is like the internal
stresses that growing up
in this digital world sends us
so adhd is a good example of like if we
look at content right like first there
was youtube and sorry if i'm like
historically inaccurate
then there was twitch and if we kind of
look at the dynamic-ness of content like
youtube used to be like you know still
like it's a storehouse of content you
kind of pick what you watch you're not
missing anything because it's to be up
there forever and then we that sort of
evolves into twitch right
and like twitch is like more interactive
it's more temporary so you got to kind
of be there it's a little bit more adhd
and then like that evolves into tick
tock which is like the whole point of
tick tock is that it's super short right
we also have evolutions from text
messaging to things like snapchat and
i'm still not 100 sure about this but my
understanding about about snapchat is
that it's it's like you know the whole
idea is that the messages are temporary
so if you don't check it frequently like
it disappears into the ether so if we
look at the way that technology is
advancing it's selecting for and
entraining conditioning a shorter
attention span
and so that's why it's one of the
reasons why i think that adhd is getting
worse
but technology is also having effects on
things like depression and anxiety so
when we get bombarded with the worst
news from all over the world every
single day
we begin to see the world as falling
apart as we see the world as falling
apart we start to feel depressed and
hopeless because how can i fix climate
change i can't
might as well sit at home and do nothing
right how can i fix
all of this like you know
racial hatred i can't might as well sit
down and do nothing
you know how can i fix all of these like
income inequality like i can't fix it
i'm powerless so when you like when you
get bombarded with this sensory
information and you feel powerless and
then like the internet gives you this
sweet sweet tick tock right it's like
don't don't worry man it's okay like
don't worry about climate change here
watch this tick talk about climate
change which will like engage your
emotions and make you feel
self-righteous and will help you feel
better and after you watch that tick
tock about climate change why don't you
check this one about check out this one
about cats because cats are hilarious
don't you love cats
and so that's what happens right we have
like this this world that bombards us
with all this depressing information and
then it gives us like it creates this
problem and then it gives us this
solution
and we take the solution our brain loves
the solution and then we end up trapped
in this cycle
of like you know being emotionally like
pulled around like a like a puppet on on
strings and we get like emotionally like
existentially depressed and then we get
like coping strategies but that's not
even a coping strategy it's an addiction
really
it's like we'll fix that for you oh like
you're in withdrawal from heroin like
here have some more heroin that's
essentially what like is happening in
the in on the internet right now is that
it's like addicting us to heroin by
giving us all this negative emotion and
then it's like here i've got the
solution for you right here
right it's and so like yeah i think that
this is a societal thing it's a
technological thing in the pre-digital
generation i don't think understands
that
right and so this is even funny we even
have a word for it right so like the
internet has collectively realized
that this is going on so we developed
our own language of copium that's like
literally like we put we created a word
to describe this phenomenon
because it's happening and it's so
prevalent it's crazy
right
like even look at the icon like look at
this picture
of this pepe with his eyes closed who's
got he can't even
you guys understand he's got a mask on
because he can't even bring himself to
hold it to his face he is so afk from
the world that it needs to be strapped
onto him in order for him to get that
copium
he can't even be bothered to get get up
out of his chair and like walk over to
the copium machine and like take a hit
of copia
he just sticks it on he can't even keep
his eyes just gotta afk completely
you guys get that it's like actually
like in the image
i mean it's it's a beautiful image like
art is like a fantastic way to capture
what is happening in society
right so you guys think that like i'm
good at analyzing society in psychology
but like i'm a fraction of what a
brilliant artist is capable of
because here i am i've been lecturing
now for the better part of it's two
hours holy
and an artist will capture it like this
whoever made this
captured it in like 300 pixels
it's brilliant
right they've taken pepe
and they've just given pepe different
facial expressions
and they've encapsulated so much it's
also interesting because you know
i remember learning in history class
that hieroglyphics were a primitive
language and that the alphabet is a
superior language right because the
alphabet allows us to you know construct
words and things like that you only need
to learn 26 characters
and now it's like we've like swung
through alphabet and into emojis and so
we've come full circle back to
hieroglyphics
where now like people don't even
communicate and once again it was like
writing letters
used to be inferior to having a phone
call and now we've come full circle and
we're like back to texting is our
primary form of communication
and it's like we're coming full circle
and they've understood this in in like
east asia for a long time right so they
have like chinese characters and kanji
which are essentially like hieroglyphics
and so it's just interesting that a lot
of you know a lot of our understanding
of like language was like actually kind
of eurocentric
in terms of its you know a value system
that i don't think was actually accurate
you